Diversity at Bletchley Park
============================
_27 May 2015_

During World War II, Bletchley Park was the location of the Government Code and Cipher School (GC&CS), a secret facility ran by the British government to break the encrypted Axis communications (History of Bletchley Park), most famously, the Nazi Enigma cipher (Captain Ridley’s Shooting Party). The Axis nations (Germany, Japan, etc.) used various
“codes and ciphers” for military communications, and the intelligence
that was recovered from breaking these codes “was of vital importance to
\[England’s\] national security and ultimate victory” (History of
Bletchley Park). It has been estimated that the intelligence recovered
at Bletchley Park shortened World War II by over a year and saved
millions of lives (Copeland).

Furthermore, the personnel themselves of Bletchley Park were
demographically diverse. Scott Page, a writer about diversity, provides
the analogy of Bletchley Park attempting to “cast a wide net... \[to
enable\] diverse fishes \[to\] swim together” (Page 3). The actual work
performed at Bletchley Park was an incredibly difficult mental task by
itself as the ciphers were complex and computers had not been developed
yet (cfh). However, the work was solely mental; anybody, regardless of
their gender, country of origin, religion, or other factors, could be
qualified to become a codebreaker. As a result of the difficult nature
of the work performed at Bletchley Park and therefore the relatively few
number of people fit to be codebreakers, diversity was essential to the
success of Bletchley Park; if Bletchley Park was not diverse, far too
many important people would have been overlooked in the recruiting
process, and the codebreakers would be collectively under-qualified.

The roles of women at Bletchley Park provide a practical example of the
necessity of diversity. During World War II, there were simply not
enough men available, and women provided a new, untapped sector of the
population to recruit. Outside of Bletchley Park specifically, the
British government recognized this need, and in December 1941, some
women were conscripted alongside of men to work in the “auxiliary units
of the armed forces” (UK Parliament). While this act exempted many more
women from service than men, it still shows the importance of women
during war.

One example of a female codebreaker at Bletchley Park was Joan Clarke
(Hinsley 113). In her memoir, Clarke reflected that, “the duller routine
clerical work was \[inevitably\] done by women, since only men... could
join GC&CS” (Hinsley 115). While Clarke was clearly able to evade
conforming to these rigid, sexist gender roles, this first-hand account
shows how sexism, at times, was unfortunately common. Furthermore,
Clarke *was* treated as a normal codebreaker, but this treatment was
“obviously because of \[her\] degree” because it was “before \[Clarke\]
had any chance of proving \[herself\]” (Hinsley 113). While Joan Clarke
did *have* a job as a codebreaker at Bletchley Park, she still witnessed
sexism.

However, there *were* female codebreakers who had a much better
experience with respect to their gender. For instance, Mavis Batey and
Margaret Rock, alongside their boss, Dilly Knox, were two women whose
work was critical to the Allied victory at D-Day (Telegraph). Their team
was responsible for breaking the Abwehr Enigma machine, one of the
variants of the Enigma machine used by the Germans, which allowed “the
British... to read the high-level Abwehr messages” (Telegraph). Their work
was notable as the decrypted messages were used in the Allied Double
Cross Deception plan (Telegraph). These women had a direct, positive
effect on the war by enabling the deception to work effectively.

Sexual orientation differentiated Alan Turing from many of his
coworkers; in addition to being one of the most important people at
Bletchley Park, Turing was a gay man during a time period where being
gay was illegal (Wansell). This ironic position was summarized by
another cryptanalyst who worked with Turing, Jack Good (Irving John
Good):

> \[It\] was a good thing that the authorities hadn’t known Turing was a
> homosexual during the war, because, if they had, they would have fired
> him– and we would have lost. (Wansell)

Despite Turing’s work for Britain, he was nonetheless “convicted of
gross indecency with a\[nother\] male \[sic\]” and forced to take
oestrogen injections as a result (Wansell). Turing unfortunately
committed suicide as a result (Wansell), although there remains
controversy as the cause of death, cyanide poisoning, may have been an
accident and not a deliberate suicide (Pease).

Religion was another factor contributing to diversity at Bletchley Park.
There were many high-ranking Jewish cryptanalysts (Sugarman). The most
notable example was Irving John Good (birth name Isidore Jacob Gudak), a
cryptanalyst who worked under Alan Turing (Sugarman). Another example
was Walter Eytan, who, in addition to his work at Bletchley Park, was an
Israeli diplomat and an active Zionist (Joffe). As antisemitism was
ironically active during World War II in Britain (Goldman), it is
particularly exceptional that these people were able to accomplish
everything they did.

Furthermore, while Bletchley Park was British, there *was* collaboration
between Britain and other Allied intelligence agencies. While not
involving Bletchley Park directly per se, one example of collaboration
between countries was the development of the original bombe, the machine
used to break Enigma, created by the Polish intelligence. It was only
later that the British developed their new, improved bombe machine
(Kahn). These machines were one of the important tangible results of
Bletchley Park as they enabled the codebreaking process to be greatly
expedited (Carter).

The United States Department of War also collaborated with the
Government Code and Cipher School. Bletchley Park was mainly responsible
for decrypting the “German Machine Ciphers”; a now declassified document
from the National Security Agency details the organization of
codebreaking agencies across international borders (United States War
Department 6-8). International collaboration, by definition, allows even
more people to work on a particular problem; a larger workforce *is*,
ultimately, the benefit of diversity.

The unconventional recruiting process used at Bletchley Park took into
account the critical need for diversity. The process focused on finding
minds capable of performing this highly difficult and unconventional
work required, as opposed to simply finding people with degrees in
relevant fields (Budiansky 138). As traditional résumés clearly were
little aid to recruiters, social circles were frequently leveraged
(Ettridge) as a usable but non-ideal alternative to more objective
methods of finding employees.

In response to the need to find large amounts of capable people, rather
obscure recruitment practices developed. One notable example of this
phenomenon was the use of a crossword puzzle competition organized
through the newspaper, *The Daily Telegram*. Crossword experts who
claimed to have completed every puzzle from *The Daily Telegram* were
invited to a timed competition. After, some contestants received letters
in the mail recruiting them to work for the Government Code and Cipher
School, although they were not told the ulterior purpose of the letter
immediately due to security concerns (Budiansky 137-138). Similar to the
strategy used at Bletchley Park, the United States intelligence agencies
recruited their cryptanalysts through puzzles and cryptograms (Budiansky
138).

In addition to diversity being essential, diversity was somewhat
transparent due to the culture at Bletchley Park; this transparency was
a direct effect of being in a state of war. Regardless of potential
minority groups, everyone was normalized by both the omnipresent sense
of a “common enemy” (Grey 114) and also the secrecy, perpetuated by
propaganda slogans such as “careless talk costs lives” (Grey 113). These
factors arguably simplified the lives of the people in minority groups
at Bletchley Park by forcing potentially bigoted workers to focus on
*only* their work as opposed to their coworkers.

In normal conditions, during a normal time period, prejudice and
discrimination is highly unethical. At war time, however, prejudice is
detrimental and potentially lethal. The GC&CS needed the skills of
*anyone* who could assist their work, regardless of who they were or
traditional bias. For example, in England during 1933, there were three
hundred thousand Jews (Jewish Population of Europe in 1933: Population
Data By Country); inevitably, there were *some* Jewish cryptanalysts;
clearly half of the population was female; inevitably, there were *some*
female cryptanalysts. Sexism, antisemitism, and similar prejudices *had*
to be overcome, as the most brilliant cryptographers could have been
hidden in any one of these minority groups. Unfortunately, none of these
factors were eliminated entirely. Joan Clarke, for instance, still
experienced *some* degree of sexism, and Alan Turing was forced to stay
in the closet as his very identity risked both his job and his life.
However, conditions were still better for these people than they would
likely have been during a less urgent time period. When a country is in
active danger and at war, people are *forced* to change, positively *or*
negatively.

This phenomenon was clearly present at Bletchley Park during World War
II as well as the general Allied nations during this time period. One
notable example of this effect in other Allied nations was the idea of
’Rosie the Riveter’, a symbol of feminism that called American women in
the workforce when many jobs were left unfilled due to male conscription
in the United States (Rosie the Riveter). Fundamentally, during times
like World War II, diversity is *essential* in all aspects parts of
life, and the progressive workforce at Bletchley Park was no exception.

---

Budiansky, Stephen. *Battle of Wits: The Complete Story of Codebreaking
in World War II*. New York, NY: Touchstone, 2000.

“Captain Ridley’s Shooting Party”. Bletchley Park. Bletchley Park Trust.
2015. Web. 17 May 2015.

Carter, Frank. *The Turing Bombe*. The Rutherford Journal. The
Rutherford Journal, n.d. Web. 16 May 2015.

cfh. “Mathematically, why was the Enigma machine so hard to crack?”.
Mathematics. StackExchange, 18 Apr 2015. Web. 19 May 2015.

Copeland, Jack. *Alan Turing: The codebreaker who saved ’millions of
lives’*. BBC. BBC, 19 June 2012. Web. 17 May 2015.

Ettridge, Joy. *WW2, People’s War*. *BBC*. BBC, 07 June 2005. Web. 08
May 2015.

Goldman, Aaron. *The Resurgence of Antisemitism in Britain during World
War II*. JSTOR. Indiana University Press, 1984. Web. 17 May 15\
&lt;http://www.jstor.org/discover/10.2307/4467242&gt;.

Grey, Christopher. *Decoding Organization: Bletchley Park, Codebreaking,
and Organization Studies*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
2012.

Hinsley, F.H. and Stripp, A. *Codebreakers: The Inside Story of
Bletchley Park*. Berkshire, Britain: Oxford University Press, 1993.

“History of Bletchley Park”. Bletchley Park. Bletchley Park Trust. 2015.
Web. 12 May 2015.

“Jewish Population of Europe in 1933: Population Data By Country”.
Holocaust Encyclopedia. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum,
Washington, DC, 20 Jun 2014. Web. 16 May 2015.

Joffe, Lawrence. *Obituary: Walter Eytan*. thegaurdian. 28 May 2001.
Web. 16 May 2015.

Kahn, David. *The Codebreakers: The Comprehensive History of Secret
Communication from Ancient Times to the Internet*. 1967. New York, NY:
Scribner, 1996.

*Mavis Batey - obituary*. The Telegraph. 13 Nov 2013. Web. 16 May 2015.

Page, Scott E. *The Difference: How the Power of Diversity Creates
Better Groups, Firms, Schools, and Societies*. Princeton, New Jersey:
Princeton University Press, 2007.

Pease, Roland. *Alan Turing: Inquest’s suicide verdict ’not
supportable’*. BBC. BBC, 26 June 2012. Web. 17 May 2015.

“Rosie the Riveter”. History. A&E Television Networks, 2015. Web. 19 May
2015.

Sugarman, Martin. *World War II: Jewish Personnel at Bletchley Park*.
n.p, 2015. Web. 04 May 2015.

UK Parliament. *Conscription: the Second World War*. UK Parliament, n.d.
Web. 08 May 2015.

United States War Department. *Agreement between British Government Code
and Cipher School and US War Department in regard to certain “Special
Intellignence”*. *National Security Agency*. NSA, June 1943. Web. 05 Apr
2015. Declassified 07 Apr 2010.

Wansell, Geoffrey. *How Britain drove its greatest genius Alan Turing to
suicide... just for being gay*. dailymail. 11 Sep 2009. Web. 16 May
2015.

---

Author's note: This paper was originally written for my combined
English-History class. It was adapted for blog publication on 5 Feb 2017.
I thus thank my teacher for forcing me to wr-- supporting me throughout
the writing process and helping me grow as a thinker, as well as my
parents for doing the same.


