Hello, World!
=================
_20 Mar 2015_

_Hello, World!_ is a phrase uttered by many programmers, at a variety of times
in their careers.

## The very beginnings

_Hello, World_ is the name of the first program written by many, as it is often
the most **simple** program.

In Python, Perl, Ruby, and countless other scripting languages, _Hello, World_
is a single line of code:

```python print "Hello, World!" ```

Yet, as you enter the realm of low-level languages, the realm of computers
themselves, _Hello, World_ becomes an increasingly difficult program to write.

In most assembly languages, for instance, strings are not a first-class concept
as they are in high-level languages. Writing a program to print the string
"Hello, World~" to the screen may or may not be trivial. At a minimum, system
calls require a bit of boilerplate code; at some layers, _Hello, World_ might
require implementing display drivers themselves!

Probably not. Point is, `1 + 1` is perhaps a better first program. Integers are
perhaps easier to work with than strings; addition is perhaps better defined
than printing to the string. What is it, then, that draws new programmers to
_Hello, World_?

_Hello, World_ is **interesting**. Not necessarily **simple**, but
**interesting**. Let that sink in for a minute.

## The experienced learning

I am a decent programmer. Many programmers are better than I am. Many others
can learn from me. I wrote my first _Hello, World_ program years ago. What am I
doing, writing one now?

Think about _Hello, World_ on a deeper level. Not the program, everyone has
thought about the program, but the words "Hello" and "World."

Note the comma. When we write "Hello, World", both the phrase and the program,
we are **addressing** the world itself. (For readers interested in poetry, this
is called "apostrophe").

We are welcoming ourself into the World. The World of Python. The World of
Perl. The World of Blogging. The World of Programming. The World of _Anything
**New**_.

Simply because I was welcomed into the world of programming years ago does not
mean I was also welcomed into the world of blogging.

## Shehecheyanu

Judiasm has a prayer, the Shehecheyanu (literally, "Who has given us life"),
for new experiences. Generally, it is said when someone does something new for
    the first time (in a while). There are a variety of traditions surrounding
    its usage; I'm not particularly familiar with them. (If you're interested,
    read its [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shehecheyanu) page.)

I propose that _Hello, World_ is the Shehecheyanu of programmers. I may
criticise the traditional reasons for saying the Shehecheyanu, and I may
criticise the traditional reasons for writing a _Hello, World_ program (as
opposed to, for instance, FizzBuzz), but these traditions are ingrained in
Jewish and programmer cultures respectively. If you would like to welcome
yourself to _anything_, who am I to prevent you from reciting Shehecheyanu or
writing _Hello, World_? I, for one, continue to write these programs out of
sheer tradition.

# Hello, World.
