Now Available as Markdown at a Website Near You
=====================================================
_8 Feb 2017_

We live in a world with an Internet bought out by commercialism and almost
entirely consumed by consumerism. Websites are bloated ("by necessity") with
ads, trackers, flashy styles, invasive [JavaScript](javascript-vanity.html),
and so on. Try browsing the web with
[lynx](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lynx_(web_browser)) -- I think you'll
quickly agree that there is an issue. I shudder to think how these websites
render with screen readers. Minimalism, a philosophy I used to endorse
whole-heartedly for lack of better options, likes to push back by simply
removing everything that's not directly relevant. It's an honorable idea, but
there's a better way, once the underlying problem is identified.

Really, this is about taking control over presentation away from publishers and
into the hands of users. *Users* should be the ones who set the CSS they want,
rather than being forced to accept flashy styles. *Users* should decide how to
aggregate content, rather than being forced to read about eleven weird tricks
doctors hate (you won't believe number seven!). And perhaps most importantly --
although most controversially -- *users* should decide if, when, how, and how
much to [pay](https://www.brave.com/publishers.html) the author. Net neutrality
goes a lot farther than ISPs.

I don't pretend to have the solution to this; after all, it is a social problem
rather than a technical one. But to this end, I'm making my HTML and my style
sheets purely optional -- every page on this website as of the time of writing
is available directly as pandoc-flavour markdown. Try [it](/index.md)!
